# Explainable AI for Brain Tumor Classification from MRI Scans
The automatic classification of brain tumor from MRI plays a very important role in diagnosing brain tumor in advance and planning its treatments properly. In the recent era, many deep learning models, particularly CNNs have been successfully applied to detect brain tumors by analyzing MRI images. But the major limitation with most of these methods is that they tend to focus only on improving accuracy and operate as a black-box algorithm without explaining the logic behind their output decisions. As a result, it becomes impossible to verify whether the trained deep-learning-based classification models are paying attention to correct parts of images and making accurate predictions. This paper therefore proposes a deep learning-based system with enhanced explainability capability for detecting brain tumors in MRI images. Various pre-trained deep learning CNN architectures including EfficientNetB0, ResNet50, and DenseNet121 are used in this project for detecting four categories of brain tumors, i.e., glioma, meningioma, pituitary, and no tumor. These deep learning CNN models are trained using transfer learning, data augmentation, and class balancing techniques. Experimental results indicate that ResNet50 has achieved the highest level of accuracy around 96%, which beats DenseNet121 and EfficientNetB0 by scoring 90% and 89% accuracy respectively. For increased transparency, the algorithm assigns numerical values, which provide prediction reliability, focus, and sharpness. This information is summarized into an explainability score that accounts for prediction reliability and localization quality. The system uses the score to dynamically determine the optimal model on an MRI image basis with improved confidence in decisions. In this way, multi-model learning, visualization, and quantification combine for significantly increasing transparency in brain-tumor detection. Besides achieving a very high level of accuracy in classifications, the project proposes a solution that provides meaningful and accessible interpretations of the results obtained using AI models.
